welcome to toast and to chapter 10 of
the fabric of reality the nature of
mathematics today I'll be talking about
an issue a topic a chapter that really
I've mentioned as much as I've mentioned
anything else on toast over these last
few years throughout the beginning of
infinity we discussed the nature of
mathematics I've done an episode on the
mathematician's misconception I've done
many episodes on other philosophy ERS
and physicists misconceptions about
mathematics and of course I've talked
about David Deutsch's view of how
mathematics our knowledge thereof arises
out of his own discoveries in physics so
the strange thing is that I'm kind of
doing so much in Reverse today because
my mind was blown it was completely
changed by chapter 10 about mathematics
the first time I began to think hold on
this mathematics stuff that I've been
told throughout school high school and
then University how mathematics stood
apart it was a realm of certainty it was
the one place where you could get to the
truth in fact turned out to be just as
fallible a domain of knowledge as
everything else this was ma to say that
this was surprising is a massive
understatement even though I'd read the
previous nine chapters of the fabric of
reality I couldn't have predicted the
content of chapter 10 I wasn't smart
enough I suppose but it didn't enter my
mind that all that stuff about
conjectural knowledge that had already
come also applied to mathematics until
it was laid bare for me here in this
chapter and once again as I talk about
throughout the toast series one of the
most thrilling parts of the worldview of
David deuts is this sense of vertigo you
get when you first encounter it and then
rather often when you hear the man speak
because your cherished assumptions about
the world when you think you're this
aidite educated intellectual person who
understands at least part of the nature
of reality then do hit you in the face
over and again with how everything that
you previously thought in fact is wrong
and this is no exception this is a prime
example pardon the pun of exactly this
phenomenon there were the two big
occasions in the book that I've talked
about before the first was chapter 2
Shadows where the ground fell out from
under me that in fact hey you could
understand quantum theory that was here
in the fabric of reality also again when
David Deutch undermined solipsism for me
and said because hither to I'd kind of
bought into the idea as many do who
study philosophy and physics that the
dayart kind of got something right
namely that I think therefore I am is a
certain or necessary truth each time you
utter it so it wasn't until earlier on
in the fabric of reality that you read
that there's an argument against this
namely that that argument is that if
you're the only thing that exists in the
universe you're a solipsist if you buy
into this idea that you can be certain
yourself that you exist and that's the
only certainty you have and everything
else could just be a Dream well you're
still buying into relativism with some
needless philosophical baggage because
all you're saying is that the content of
your mind your dream is
just as complicated and complex and and
behaves in the same sort of autonomous
way as regular realism does it's just it
can be investigated via the methods of
Science and philosophy and Mathematics
in the same way that's regular realism
can so these were two moments of vertigo
at least but this this stands equally as
tall this idea that everyone has brought
up with that mathematics is absolutely
certain you can't possibly question
anything in mathematics how could
mathematics ever be wrong mathematics
stands apart from everything else well
here we go we're just going to apply
fallibility to mathematics but not just
and where does this come from anyway now
I think David deutsche's spin on this
adds something quite new via his own
personal discovery of the theory of
quantum computation it brings physics
into the picture into the poyan
epistemological picture of fallibility
that we have yes you can get there about
the nature of mathematics via poer alone
namely mathematics is just conjectural
all knowledge is conjectural all is a
woven web of guesses you can get there
via xenophon 2 and a half thousand years
ago what does Deutsch add to this well
he adds a fundamental physical Theory to
the picture as well after all this is
the man who first created the theory of
quantum computation why does that matter
this is a a universal theory that
applies everywhere to all physical
systems it says that even your brain can
be simulated by a quantum computer every
single atom that's vibrating there could
in principle be simulated by a quantum
computer what does this mean it means
that there is a onetoone correspondence
between the internal workings the goings
on inside a quantum computer and any
physical process including your brain so
therefore whatever laws apply to the
quantum computer also apply to what your
brain does as well because they are
equivalent in terms of fundamental
physics the laws that apply to one
govern both why does this matter why
does this universality of computation
applying to the laws of physics to all
physical systems have anything to do
with the nature of mathematics well
because our understanding of mathematics
including the int the so-called
intuitions of mathematicians
are what brains are doing mathematicians
arrive at their theorems their truths
their understanding of these pristine
abstract objects their understanding of
those objects mind you via the use of a
physical system governed by physical
laws physical laws which mandate the
uncertainty of the output of any
physical system that is performing a
computation which includ UD stuff like
what the brain is doing the brain is
performing a computation yes you can get
some visitors to say things which I
regard is somewhat nonsense people like
Martin re who is a world-renowned
astrophysic cosmologist highly respected
but we'll say things like comprehension
is not a computation well that's just an
assertion there's no explanation behind
that after all it contravenes
contradicts a known law of physics that
that known law of physics is all
physical processes are computable they
amount to computations they're in one
toone correspondence with the goings on
of a quantum computer that's provable so
if it's the case which it is that the
output of a quantum computer is subject
to error which it is then so too is any
physical process performing a
computation that includes what a brain
does so anything that a mathematician
thinks is going to be subject to error
and you might think well can't we just
correct errors yes you can but that
process itself is also subject to errors
but like any area of knowledge whether
it's mathematics or science or history
or whatever the critical approach helps
you to identify the errors and correct
errors but you can never be sure or
certain you you can never reach this
state objectively you might think that
you've got it subjectively you might
feel as if you're sure or certain or
something like that but that doesn't
mean you're
objectively reach the truth in physical
reality you can't get outside everything
is a woven web of guesses you can't get
outside the laws of physics and so for
that reason what your brain does the
certainty that you feel could always be
a mistake it could always have been a
Quantum fluctuation of some kind giving
you the illusion of certainty the
illusion of having found something true
it could give the illusion of everyone
on planet Earth having the feeling that
something is absolutely true when in
fact it contains an error that none of
us notice now this can happen the best
explanation for this kind of thing is of
course that people have just made a
mistake and have hither to misunderstood
something but it could be the case you
you can't rule out the possibility that
there could be some sort of exceedingly
unlikely small measure of universes and
we happen to occupy one branch of the
Multiverse where we've just made the era
over and over and over and over and over
again and we're in a history where we
just think that we've arrived at
Absolute pristine certainty and Truth
when in fact it's not the truth after
all okay so that's a bad explanation but
it's also something that can't be ruled
out whatever the case this does provide
a physical substructure to what kyl POA
was saying in terms of philosophy namely
that error is everywhere misconceptions
abound we can never be sure we can never
be certain that we have arrived at the
final ultimate truth because knowledge
is conjectural the only way in which we
reach external reality is via our minds
which are encased inside the darkness of
our skulls working on brains obeying the
laws of physics we have these imperfect
channels which sure we can attempt to
error correct and sometimes we do quite
reliably Eric correct but we can never
perfectly Ensure
that we are ever free of error indeed
progress depends upon there always being
misconceptions and errors out there in
all of our knowledge including
mathematics because it's by correcting
those errors that we improve we make
progress and so error from that
perspective is a good thing the fact
that it exists the possibility of error
means the possibility of correcting
errors which means the possibility of
moving forward if there wasn't an error
somewhere that would be a block to
possible progress in that domain and
that's not a good thing we want to make
progress everywhere in all directions
infinite in all directions all the time
so this chapter of the fabric of reality
the nature of mathematics was written
before I think the arguments were even
better refined by David himself later on
under the title of what he has come to
call the mathematicians
misconception famously now in his der
award ceremony speech he delivered an
address or lecture titled the
mathematician's misconception the text
of the speech is here on his website
I've done some podcasts about it you can
watch the lecture itself which I highly
recommend and it talks about the
contents of chapter 10 but in new ways
it approaches it in in subtly different
ways it's also of course there in the
beginning of infinity as well in the
reality of abstra actions and and pepper
throughout much of the rest of the book
as well ultimately it just comes down to
human beings are fallible we are
fallible creatures our minds are
performing computations this is very
difficult for some people to understand
I think and to appreciate the full
implications of that what our minds are
doing is Computing stuff very few
physicists it seems to me although they
tend to agree with the basic underlying
principle don't seem to appreciate the
implications thereof namely the
implication being that you can always be
wrong even about mathematics this is why
I've done so many podcasts and in
particular this one here which focuses
very heavily on the mathematician
misconception as you hear people like
Max tegmark enunciate over and over
again although he understands physics
very well I don't think he understands
the implications of the universality of
computation and of quantum physics in
particular although he understands
quantum physics the philosophical
implications are very important he
illuminates for me what I tweeted out
recently about how you know lots of
people who do philosophy degrees they
will study formal logic which is highly
symbolic it looks technically difficult
it looks like mathematics but it's not
quite mathematics and certainly studying
logic to a higher level of proficiency
as one can do even mathematical logic
doesn't give you any insight into let's
say calculus it doesn't even tell you
anything about trigonometry these things
are separate areas of mathematics if you
like one doesn't automatically translate
into the other you don't get the other
by osmosis in the same way you can do an
entire degree in pure mathematics and
never have a good understanding of the
laws of physics you might be technically
proficient in mathematics but you just
don't understand you don't have an
intuitive feel for the of physics you
don't know how to fix an engine you
don't understand what uh the standard
model of particle physics is you might
not even understand what general
relativity is what the implications are
all that kind of stuff and in the same
way in precisely the same way you can be
a theoretical physicist technically
proficient in solving your physics
equations in understanding the history
of physics and and be able to perform
calculations using general relativity
and quantum theory and maybe even String
Theory but at no point do you study the
fundamentals of epistemology much less
poyan epistemology the correct stuff The
Right Stuff the good stuff but a lot of
physicists although they understand the
first two moves are invalid namely
understanding logic doesn't mean you're
going to understand mathematics more
broadly and understanding mathematics
quite broadly and deeply doesn't mean
you're going to understand physics at
all they understand all that's true but
they don't seem to appreciate that
exactly the same move is invalid when it
comes to being a good physicist and
understanding
epistemology epistemology doesn't come
along for the ride so to speak it should
and it would be nice if it did but
people just aren't taught epistemology
and in so far as they are they have a
folk epistemology which is completely
false even the philosophy departments
don't teach this stuff there's no one
outside of the community of people who
have coalesced around the work of David
Doge and K poer who really understand
this stuff properly yes I have to say it
that's just the way it is the so-called
critical rationalist school gets how
knowledge grows is created and what
knowledge is and I would say unless
you're reading the work of Kiara maretto
and David do you don't you don't have
our best understanding of what knowledge
is you will have a completely misaligned
view about knowledge you will have a
platonic type view you will have the
objectivist type view that you can get
to certain knowledge and all the sort of
incorrect stuff anyway my point is here
that often people go to physicists when
I say people I mean podcasters you know
people like Joe Rogan Sam Harris uh any
number of people will go to a physicist
to try and understand how knowledge
broadly Works they will ask them
questions about philosophy and
epistemology as if they have some deep
insight about these things but they
don't they're separate domains it needs
to be understood independently in its
own terms the epistemologist who is
expert in let's say poyan epistemology
won't necessarily have any deep insights
into general relativity although they
might have some because if you are
reading KL POA Poppa's work he talks so
much about general relativity quantum
theory the science broadly and so
therefore you will end up having some
understanding of those areas because
he's always drawing on examples or
instances of where his epistemology
applies in real life science a rarity a
rarity in philosophy you know you don't
get this in Iron Rand for example she
doesn't draw her examples from The
History of Science she draws her
examples from an abstract realm or from
morality or from economics and finance
and and certain parts of history but
it's not grounded in science which is
where I think philosophy is best applied
because it's clean it has nice clean
examples of how how knowledge is
generated and what knowledge is and then
you realize Ah that's how it works in
science therefore that's how it works
everywhere because basically we're all
being scientists all the time in trying
to understand the world our circumstance
in the world and of course poyan
epistemology then goes on to explain how
well the demarcation between science and
non-science is via the Criterion of
testability but that's not a Criterion
of meaning and so on and so forth all
that kind of stuff comes in and so then
you understand that science is this kind
of separate thing okay my point still
is physicists in general don't
understand this stuff they don't
understand how knowledge is created what
it is and so they are liable to make the
kinds of errors that Max Tark makes or
saine hossenfelder makes or Eric
Weinstein makes and and someone it goes
the the the list of physicists is well
as long as the list of physicist that
you can name who think that mathematics
has this special place in the pantheon
of subjects that we can study namely
that it is a realm of perfection of
platonic ideals that we can have access
to David Deutsch brings to us a
different vision of what the
relationship between knowledge creation
and people and mathematicians is to the
stuff they're studying to the stuff
they're studying these are separate
things your understanding of the truths
of mathematics and the truths of
mathematics themselves and how to bridge
that Gap via this method of as Kyle poer
explains conjecture and reputation forms
of criticism this is different to all
those other philosophies that are out
there about this kind of stuff and it
applies to logic and perception and all
that stuff that iron Rand and the
objectivist get completely wrong when
they get so much else right now it may
seem like I'm p in on the objectivists
here and to some extent I suppose I am
because they're emblematic of this
particular era the era that is described
by the mathematician's misconception
because I think the mathematician's
misconception runs deeper than just
mathematics it's the very idea or
mistake that the empiricists made as
well that there is this Royal Road to
certain perfect truth and the
mathematicians still hold to that today
they still hold to this notion that you
can ensure to your idea or perceive
perfect truth in some way shape or form
you can get outside of what Zen offing
is called all being a woven web of
guesses once you take that truth
seriously this idea that we're
conjecturing our way to knowledge all is
just this web of guesses that you can't
see the truth perceive the truth and
access the truth the final truth but
instead all you can do is conjecture
what you think could be the truth and
create knowledge about that stuff and by
error correction over time guess that
you might have found some truth some
useful information something we call
Knowledge which has some of the errors
corrected so we have a movement in the
direction of more truth broadly speaking
but again that too is not guaranteed as
David Deutsch spoke about in my
conversation with him with the V rant we
talked precisely about how well you just
can never know that what you're building
in terms of this edifice of knowledge
might itself contain all these terrible
misconceptions maybe just maybe what you
have is something more like a religion
but then again you know I might say
something like well even religion is not
in the whole completely false it can
contain a whole bunch of misconceptions
and Supernatural nonsense and so on and
so forth but it might still be
converging on certain truths that you
can get independently via other routes
that don't involve the superstitious
nonsense let's say but all of that aside
the objectivists like the empiricists
like a whole bunch of other philosophers
and
philosophies claim that there is this
way of reaching perfection in our
knowledge in some way that although they
will admit an iron Rand actually does
admit that we human beings are fallible
that reason is fallible but nonetheless
there are certain moods in which you can
be absolutely certain like a law of
identity because they can't imagine how
it could possibly be otherwise they want
to have a foundation everyone wants a
foundation except for Carl POA and David
Deutsch we talk about how you don't need
a foundation it doesn't require a
foundation you're you're constructing a
web not a building and there's a
difference you know the web is sort of
all interconnected and it's able to
capture reality to some extent if you're
building a good web but it's not like a
building where you have the Foundations
at the bottom and if you find a floor
with the foundations and the whole thing
falls apart the whole thing falls apart
no what we say is well what you're
calling foundations might very well
shift and change but the whole thing the
whole structure doesn't have to fall
apart in the same way the web isn't
going to completely collapse because a
particular strand is broken at some
point to torture these analogies is
perhaps a little too much okay almost
enough Treading Water we should get into
some reading maybe one more thing to
mention just before I go on if you want
to hear an excellent conversation about
some of this if you're not let's say
persuaded of the idea and I know many
aren't this idea that the human brain is
our computer it's performing
computations and so therefore is subject
to the laws of physics and so we can
understand what have some deep insight
about what the brain can do and can't do
and what the nature of different kinds
of knowledge is and ideas that we have
explicit and inexplicit ideas let's say
this wonderful conversation on Lully
tannant reason is fun podcast it's this
one here they've had a number of
conversations Lully and David and in
this one in particular they talk
precisely about this idea of the brain
being a Compu U LLY presses David over
and again about this particular idea and
the implications thereof everyone should
listen to this conversation you can hear
ly probing the truth okay the truth that
all physical processes can be simulated
by a quantum computer and so all
physical processes are subject to the
same errors as what computers are and so
the uncertainty is kind of built in at a
fundamental level and so therefore in
explicit ideas we can't get to them
directly in the same way we can't get to
any ideas directly everything is again
this woven web of guesses and if you
want to try and fix something about your
mind let's say that too is always going
to be error prone and it's
understandable that people struggle with
this it's uh but I I put it on a par
with you know this this notion that that
the brain just is a computer of of a
kind of a special kind of course of a
special kind but you can't get outside
of the laws of physics it's it's that
whole idea of you know um if you have a
new explanation a new Theory of physics
and let's say it disagrees with the law
of the conservation of matter well no
big deal because the law of conservation
of matter isn't a law anyway it sort of
applies in chemistry to some extent but
we used to think it was a proper law
that governed everything then we figured
out well there are these things called
nuclear reactions which absolutely
violate the law of conservation of
matter so no problem your new Theory of
physics violates the law of conservation
of matter no problem if your law of
physics disagrees with let's say the
first law of thermodynamics which is the
conservation of energy law well okay you
might need to rethink what's going on
there but there's hope there is hope
after all because there are certain
Quantum physical processes which might
be able to get you out of your bind in
terms of violating the law of
conservation of energy
or Quantum cosmology or certain
cosmological exotic cosmological
theories which violate the law of
conservation of energy let's say you
know where does dark energy come from
this kind of stuff so you know all hope
is not lost if your new favored Theory
violates the law of conservation of
energy although you should be very
critical indeed skeptical but as people
have often said
if if your new Theory violates the
second law of thermodynamics then all
hope is lost for you there is nothing we
can say to save your new explanation it
violates a deep fundamental truth about
reality namely that the overall entropy
of the universe must increase as time
goes on and if you are saying your new
Theory violates that you've got all the
work ahead of
you I would say that this idea that all
physical processors are computer
and a special case is well the what the
human brain is doing is a computable
function is stands on the same level as
the second LW of thermodynamics or
indeed something like
uh neod Darwinism you know this idea
that genes are the unit of selection for
evolution by natural selection which
explains why we have a diversity of
species all this sort of stuff that is a
fundamental truth of biology and if
you're new theory of biology about birds
or something violates that in some way
well all hope is lost for you in your
you know your ornithological theory or
your theory of dinosaurs or whatever it
happens to be if you try to step outside
of that you've got problems all the work
is still ahead of you so to if your
favored theory of how the mind works or
of the brain or of psychology or
something like that tries to say that
the brain is not some kind of computer
all hope is lost to
you maybe not okay everything is
fallible all knowledge is conjectural so
yes the second law of Thermodynamics
could be wrong uh evolution by natural
selection could be wrong the gene might
not be the unit of
selection not all physical processes
might be computable maybe you found a
you know quantum gravity computer that
challenges our present understanding but
that's the whole point our present
understanding is our best understanding
at the moment it's it's our deepest
understanding of how science works and
reason is applied to the universe and so
we need to take our best deepest
theories seriously it's not to say it's
impossible for them to be wrong in fact
quite the opposite we expect them to
turn out wrong but in the meantime in
the meantime if you want to make
progress take them seriously and when
you're talking emergent stuff make sure
the emerging stuff comports with what
you understand the fundamental stuff to
be about and there has to be a marrying
of this and if there is a
contradiction between these two things
your your emergent theory of psychology
let's say and the Deep truths that we
understand of physics then so much for
your theory of psychology now I don't
think that lulia is making this error
not by any stret of imagination but in
certain moods you can hear people do
object to this notion of the brain as a
computer it's not dismissing it's not
there's nothing dismissive about that
claim it's not saying well the brain is
just a computer so there therefore so
much for qualia so much for
Consciousness so much for uh the the
Deep insights that a a a deeper
understanding of let's say memetics and
psychology could bring to us no there's
still the richness of Human Experience
is there the complexity of humanity and
the way in which work it's all still
there it's just it's bounded within a
substrate of physics and what we
understand physics to be in the same way
that human bodies obey laws of gravity
human Minds obey laws of physical
computation okay but you know so what
we're about to come to and I'll begin
the reading now um is the idea that your
your brain is a noisy Quantum system
like everything else in physical reality
things can go wrong in completely
unexpected ways there are always going
to be errors you do not intend which are
all to be expected this idea of
unexpected errors is itself to be
expected given quantum theory your mind
cannot correct all the errors made by
your brain as they are made in real time
maybe later but those Corrections are
themselves as I said earlier similarly
error prone so we're trapped as I say
trapped might not be the right word but
we are within this woven web of guesses
or a woven web of quantum processes
those are error prone and of course when
you explain this and I encounter this
all the time with objectivists you
explain all this stuff about how
knowledge is conjectural and they say so
you're a relativist
then they completely misunderstand that
no quite the opposite indeed not a
relativist not a dog IST a
fallibilist says that there is something
to be wrong about they walk the line
between these two misconceptions about
what knowledge is that knowledge isn't
possible on the one hand the relativist
or or the Skeptics claim and on the
other hand that you can possess the
final certain truth the dogmatists claim
the fallibilist says the final ultimate
truth it exists but you can't get there
so it takes what is good about both
things dog ISM and relativism of which
there isn't much and corrects the errors
in those things to produce the
philosophy of fallible knowledge
fallible knowledge creators conjectural
knowledge you know you sometimes do feel
like
Gandalf trapped by San on the tower of
orank you know Gandalf would say as the
great papion all is a woven web of
guesses all all conjectures are error
prone and there is no way to escape this
simple truth so you are a relativist
then no sarahan misses the point he
misses the point you know this whole
then the objectivist missed the point
and other philosophers missed the point
that just by admitting that knowledge
Claims can contain error doesn't mean
that you think there's no possibility of
knowledge you're not a relativist quite
the opposite okay I've said it a number
of times now so let's get to the reading
clearly this is going to be an episode
in a number of Parts but of course as
usual with these regular episodes of me
commenting on discussing breaking down
parts of the books of David deuts I
won't be reading everything so I
encourage everyone to buy the book If
you don't already have it and read along
with me and make sure you go to those
parts where I skip over because reading
the entire thing is absolutely essential
for understanding completely what David
Deutsch intends or at least your
understanding of what David deuts
intends more fully and David writes at
the beginning of chapter 10 the nature
of mathematics from the fabric of
reality quote the fabric of reality that
I have been describing so so far has
been the fabric of physical reality yet
I have also referred freely to entities
that are nowhere to be found in the
physical world abstractions such as
numbers and infinite sets of computer
programs nor other laws of physics
themselves physical entities in the
sense that rocks and planets are end
quote this is a point that I make in my
short podcast here the mathematicians
misconception at something I come back
to in this podcast here where I break
down mathematics as discussed by Max
tegmark and Sam Harris and my things
that make you go H series if I can give
a plug for that well worth listening to
not just if you want to hear about what
I regard as the errors that a typical
physicist makes on these topics and a
typical public intellectual podcaster
makes on these topics but I also use it
as a reason for explaining the
alternative worldview the world viiew
that I'm coming from that David's coming
from I think and Kyle POA is coming from
and anyone else who is inculcated with
these ideas is coming from as compared
to what I call the mainstream academic
intellectual perspective and on this
topic there is a certain degree of
alignment it's just how we transition
between these two worlds so to speak I
call it as jiren lenier would call it
being a disciplined duelist David does
not describe himself as a jewelist in
fact he says he's he doesn't really
understand what precisely dualism means
and I get that impulse you know does it
mean there's two substances in the world
well no but doesn't mean there are two
kinds of things in the world I think it
does and I think it is just the
difference between software and Hardware
physical things and Abstract things
which is what David is saying here
that's all I mean by dualism and when I
say discipline jewelist in jarn lenier
sense it means you don't go saying much
more than there are just these two
things saying what these other abstract
things are made of is the wrong question
you can ask what physical stuff is made
of it's made of particles but to ask
what are abstract things made of is the
wrong question because they're not made
of anything they're not a substance in
that way and it's also the wrong
question to say things like well if
physical things exist in the physical
world where do abstract things exist
well that's the wrong question it's
asking for a time or a place in which to
locate these things but that's the wrong
question because they're not located in
a physical space with a time and a place
that you can have coordinates of that's
not what abstract things are that's not
what abstract existence is about it's
not about the physical location of
things anyway I go into that elsewhere
so I won't recapitulate that entire
argument here all of it is just to say
there simply are two kinds of things
things that exist the stuff that's made
of matter physical entities and stuff
that isn't that's abstracted away from
those physical things known as abstract
things for example any individual cat
that you can point to is a physical
thing it's made of
atoms but the concept of cats is not
made of physical things it's an
abstraction where you take all the
instances of cats and Abstract from that
this thing called cat and you say that's
an abstract thing so the category of
cats is itself an abstract thing numbers
are abstract
things Concepts like justice are
abstract things I would call them
ideals that we come to understand
increasingly better over time but always
imperfectly but there is this ideal a
principle if you like that when we put
into practice we imperfectly implement
it and we can come to better understand
it over time but it exists and it exists
in better and better ways in the
physical world but we're striving for
something in the same way that with
mathematics we're striving to understand
numbers and we do that through physical
symbols
instantiations
representations of those things that
have independent
existence then we get into really
complicated kinds of
abstractions things like software
because software not only is an
abstraction like number but unlike
number it also has this property of
running you have to take the program the
software and rather than it just just
sitting there inertly on a hard drive or
a CD ROM as we used to call it or a
DVD or a solid state device of course
these days where it's just sitting there
not doing anything you can still call it
software it's a piece of code or you
could write it down on a piece of paper
if you like as an algorithm it's not
doing anything but when it runs well the
software is running and it's doing stuff
and so that's a different kind of
abstraction that now has physical
effects in the real world so that's a
different sort of thing still an
abstraction knowledge itself broadly
speaking is a kind of abstraction that
must be instantiated be represented in
the world for it to
exist you can't call something knowledge
if it doesn't exist yet that's not
knowledge it's not something that we
know but numbers they really do exist
even if we don't know about them yet as
I like to say the next highest prime
number yet to be discovered really
exists it's out there and we know it's
out there because hey in a few days
weeks months whenever it happens to be
someone will find it they will Discover
it it was their waiting to be discovered
at the moment you look up Wikipedia and
you find the highest known prime number
we can prove as a matter of rigorous
mathematical proof as we like to say
that there are infinite prime numbers
they're all there where are they wrong
question they just exist not in space
not in time not in the physical universe
but they do exist and we can come to
find them bring them into the real world
from where wrong question again they're
not in another
place they just exist discipline
jewelist you can just say they exist
we're going to understand
this concept of how abstract things
exist itself better over time we'll come
to understand what these things mean
when jiren lenier talks about this by
the way what he's talking about is
consciousness what is consciousness what
is mind well it's a different kind of
thing to what a brain is it's a
different kind of thing to what usual
matter is all we can say is that it's
different to this other stuff that we
use the laws of physics to explain
hither to mind you we just don't know
how to incorporate Consciousness fully
or mind fully within our conception of
physics yet we don't fully understand it
but we're coming to so for now we just
have to be disciplined in other words
don't make crazy claims that you already
understand Consciousness you already
have a theory of Consciousness without
us properly being able to write down the
algorithm for it if you like but that
must be possible as David Deutch says
it's a it's a physical process it's it
arises in Minds we know that the well
Minds arise from brains we just don't
know how Consciousness arises who knows
how exactly is it only in human Minds I
tend to think so but I can't prove that
maybe it arises in lower life forms as
well maybe dogs are conscious maybe apes
are conscious maybe bacteria's conscious
okay I think that's a little bit crazy
to start going down the pan psychism
route that's another story I'm getting
away from things but let me just finish
this point that knowledge is this weird
thing that has to be instantiated
numbers are a different kind of
abstraction that don't have to be
instantiated some of them are the ones
that are unknown or have never yet to be
instantiated an infinite number of
numbers will never be instantiated but
they still exist in other words we'll
never possibly write down all the
possible numbers that are out there you
know if you want to talk infinite and
different kinds of infinite well all the
different kinds of infinite are out
there in mathematics but because they're
infinite but the universe has a finite
number of ways in which the matter can
be arranged it's simply physically
impossible to instantiate all the
numbers that's
that mind is different again to all
those other kinds of abstraction that I
have mentioned so far David Deutsch
talks about this in this question for
David that I asked years ago now when I
completed my series on the beginning of
infinity one of the Highlights
Highlights of I suppose my own life here
full stop but also you know highlights
of my podcast series was interviewing
David getting to talk to him precisely
about this and one of the questions I
was Keen to get his opinion on that he
doesn't talk about much but of course
he's willing to talk about anything when
you ask him was this question about the
nature of mind and he makes the point
here well mind is different it's a
different kind of abstraction again and
basically what he say says is well
unlike all those other kinds including
knowledge and including regular software
it needs to be running it needs to be
instantiated physically just like
knowledge it needs to be running like
software kind of needs to be running to
be software rather than just code
represented as Hardware but
also do does mind need to be running in
a particular kind of physical
substrate doesn't need to be running at
a certain
speed how fast these are questions yet
to be answered after all if you were to
take the algorithm for mind whatever
that is when I say mind I mean a
conscious creative thing like people are
and you just wrote that code down as an
algorithm on a piece of paper that
wouldn't be a mind not yet it would be
the recipe for a mind now let's say you
put that into a regular computer
computer and ran it really slowly would
that be a mine then don't know maybe not
maybe it won't work just as a simulation
in a computer yet we don't know is there
something about wetwear I tend to think
not because of the universality of
computation but it it the the question
is still to some extent open to us we
don't know the relationship between
different ways of processing
stuff is a neural network different to a
regular kind of information processing
is what a brain is doing different to a
neural network I think the answer is yes
and different again to regular
computation as in the way in which
nonneural networks things like normal
computers that are built upon machine
code and running binary digits and all
that sort of stuff using logic gates is
it different again to that perhaps
there's just so much to say here so many
open
questions so does mine need to be
running the answer seems to be yes does
it need to have a particular kind of
physical substrate perhaps doesn't need
to be running at a certain speed perhaps
all these questions are open maybe
they're all easily answered maybe it's
just no no no it doesn't have to be
running at a particular speed it doesn't
need a particular physical substrate and
mine just is like any other kind of
physical program to that extent I don't
know it will be an interesting day when
we can refute all the claims that you do
need a physical substrate and you and
you do need a particular speed of
runtime and all that sort of thing but
I've certainly made the point there are
two different kinds of things with
existence in this universe purely
physical stuff and things that are a bit
more than just physical stuff okay so
that was 15 minutes on less than a
paragraph but let's persevere I think
we'll get through just a few more
paragraphs and we'll just treat this as
a a Prelude to the chapter itself let's
keep going David goes on to write quote
as I have said Galileo's book of nature
is only a metaphor and then there are
the fictions of virtual reality the
non-existent environments whose laws
differ from the real laws of physics
Beyond those of what I've called the
can't got you environments which cannot
even be rendered in virtual reality I
have said that there exist infinitely
many of those for every environment that
can be rendered but what does it mean to
say that such environments exist if they
do not exist in reality or even in
virtual reality where do they exist end
quote so just remember here Galileo's
book of nature David says there is only
a metaphor the idea that the book of
nature is written in the language of
mathematics there is no such book of
nature you can't read you can't just
look at
nature open up the so-called book and
just get from that book the knowledge to
extract the knowledge that is the
ancient misconception that implies a
bucket theory of
Mind basically the facts are there just
look at them and you'll extract the
knowledge out this is the objectivist
mistake right they think there's a book
of nature they think you can just see
reality perceive reality perceive the
knowledge this is IR Ran's mistake this
is the mistake of so many
physicists that they really do think
that knowledge is there fundamentally as
mathematics in the physical world and it
also leads to these misconceptions and
Sam Harris talks about this and this is
this ancient idea ancient now of the
unusual effectiveness of mathematics in
the Natural Sciences okay yes so it's
true the Natural Sciences employ
mathematics is it so unusual is it that
much of a deep mystery after all I'm on
the side of Fineman that it's kind of
hither to that we found that complex
mathematics is very very use ful in
being a language that is able to
describe parts of physical reality that
seems to be no accident but okay is f
and correct that ultimately what we'll
find I say ultimately but is the next
step in the evolution of our
understanding of physics going to reveal
not higher degrees of complexity which
seems to have been the trend so far you
know we go back to galileon it's
basically an algebraic notion of physics
and then we get to Newton who employed
calculus far more complicated ways of
describing motion then we get to Quantum
Theory where you're employing very
complicated forms of algebra Matrix you
know linear algebra type stuff or and or
very complicated differential equations
that go beyond anything that Newton was
ever employing and then you get to of
course ring Theory which is inventing
new and even more complicated forms of
mathematics in order to describe things
that well we don't even know if they
exist these strings and it seems like
the evolution is more and more
complicated forms of mathematics which
leads some down the road of pessimism
people like Neil degrass Tyson Shan
Carroll various other popularizers who
basically kind of throw their hands up
in the air and do say things like well
maybe there will come a limit to how
much we can understand because it seems
like the mathematics is getting too
complicated for us well maybe the
mathematics is getting too complicated
for them is all that we might say about
that some mathematicians really love
this game of developing more and more
complex mathematics it's fun for them
it's like art in the same way that that
artists don't tend to say well maybe the
next kind of art that we create it's
going to be too complicated for us to
ever possibly appreciate we can't do it
now well you can't do it I can't do it
I'm not interested in trying to develop
ever more wondrous kinds of High
Fidelity art it's just not my thing
whether it's a form of visual art of the
kind that you know AI is now producing
that is even beyond the capacity to some
extent of of human artist to do or new
versions of cinemat phography that go
well beyond you know my skill and talent
to ever replicate and most people's but
some people are really into that kind of
stuff that's great that's for them if
you're really interested in these things
you will develop new techniques or new
kinds of apps let's say new kinds of
code does does anyone in the Computing
Community say things to any any coders
say maybe the next kind of app the next
generation of app is just going to be
too complicated for us to ever possibly
appreciate and ever possibly write
there's a limit to how complicated apps
can
become no but in physics it seems to be
you know derer it's just what people say
about the laws of physics maybe the next
generation of the laws of physics
because of this gradual ratcheting up of
the complexity of the mathematics used
to describe physics and physical laws
has been to get more complicated maybe
the next set of laws will be just too
complicated for us to understand well
too complicated for them to understand
because they get bored of it and I
understand the impulse you know if
you're not a mathematician which I'm not
I'm more on the physics side of things
and even then just the astrophysics side
of things which well if you know
anything about physics you'll know and
appreciate that the mathematics that is
used in astrophysics is not all that
complicated even in quantum theory not
all that complicated yet the general
relativity a little bit more complicated
okay it depends on how far you want to
go into these things String Theory very
complicated and you have to sort of sit
down for a long time and and and and sit
with these things and devote years to
trying to understand what's being said
there and you get to a point as a
physicist you kind of go ah what's the
point it's not even real physics anyway
like it's not connecting to the physical
world via experiments and problems that
arise and you know we can talk about
that the point is mathematicians are not
so pessimistic about the possibility of
understanding this stuff but physicists
are because they have an Impulse of
getting bored and I understand that but
that's by the BU as Fineman said there's
no reason to presume that this is a
necessary fact about reality that things
must get more complicated it could be
the case that we're evolving towards a
simpler way of understanding physics
mathematically
namely that the rules of physics will
turn out to be more like the rules of
the checker
board rather than complicated stuff like
string theory and so I made the
hypothesis often that the laws are going
to turn out to be in the end simple like
the checkerboard and that all the
complexities is from size but that is of
the same nature as the other
speculations that other people make it
say I like it you don't like it it's not
good to be too prejudiced about this
thing so if fan is correct and the laws
of physics turn out to be more like this
checkerboard stuff then well everyone
will be able to understand super complex
physics complex in the sense that the
physics that comes after quantum theory
and general relativity the unification
of those two things might be really
simple ultimately speaking complex in
the sense that well it's beyond
it's a Step Beyond what general
relativity and quantum theory say about
reality so it's an evolution beyond that
but the rules are so simple that you
know any Primary School student will be
able to understand it any person who's
never really taken an interest in
physics hither to will be able to
understand it maybe that's the case that
seems to be the hoped for development
that something like Constructor Theory
might be able to provide I don't know
okay Constructor theory is still being
developed but the formalism might be
simple and maybe the ways in which
matter can be arranged again is like the
rules of a checkerboard it's just
possible and impossible moves just like
chess or Checkers something simple like
that you can do this but you can't do
that rather than hey here's all the
complex mathematical apparatus for
predicting what will happen forget about
that rather than predicting what will
happen you will just have here are the
possibilities that exist in physical
space we can't say what will happen
except in certain very narrow
circumstances but overall as we know as
we know the future is open-ended so how
do you accommodate this real part of
physical reality namely that what people
choose to do doesn't seem to be captured
yet by physics but it's part of physical
reality so how do you incorporate that
inherent unpredictability of the growth
of knowledge and people's choices and
all that stuff within a conception of
physics after all it needs to be as part
of physics physics is about what happens
in physical reality it it's not just
about predicting what ensembles of
particles
do that's part of it but it's such a
tiny part of physical
reality physics is broader than that
physics includes the whole universe
cosmology and bits of the universe
that are simple like stars and complex
stuff like the behavior of biological
organisms okay it's biology but they're
still made of physical stuff and then
Super complicated stuff like lots and
lots of particles all interacting under
physical forces that's what people
usually think of when they think physics
they think in terms of energy particles
and forces and yeah when you've got lots
of those of course things get complex
complicated but that's just one aspect
of physics and predicting what those
things are going to do but if you're not
fixated on let's predict what those
things are going to do if you understand
that okay yeah maybe you want to be able
to do that sometime some of the time but
if you also accept and just you know
sort of relax into the idea that some
things just get too complicated to
predict so okay and in fact some things
are inherently unpredictable because of
this idea of Free Will human Choice
human creativity the inability to
predict the growth of knowledge but this
is all part of what happens in the
physical world if you're comfortable
steeped in ignorance as Neil degrass
Tyson says then you can really do more
interesting science you can just talk
about this is possible this is
impossible in the world this is why I'm
excited about constructive theory it's a
whole new way of looking at physics much
more exciting and I've gotten so far
away from talking about chapter 10 that
you know we're at real risk of never
getting through this
chapter the point here is though that
the book of nature isn't necessarily
written in this complicated mathematics
that you can just
read this is what scientists
objectivists Galileo got wrong it's just
that hither to it seems to have been
written in mathematics but maybe it's
written in something far more simple a a
more logical structure you can call that
logical structure mathematics if you
like but you know are the rules of
checkers or chess mathematics mhm kind
of kind of but it's like the difference
between basic baby logic in philosophy
and complex mathematics like you know
differential equations these two things
have a logical structure and there is
commonality there but you know splitting
hairs over whether or not one's
mathematics and one isn't okay let's
read one one more paragraph and reflect
on that and call it a day for today and
then we'll we'll pick it up you know and
and and and read more over the coming
weeks David goes on to say quote do
abstract non-physical entities exist are
they part of the fabric of reality I'm
not interested here in issues of mere
word usage it is obvious that numbers
the laws of physics and so on do exist
in some senses and not in
others the substantive question is now
this how are we to understand such
entities which of them are merely
convenient forms of words referring
ultimately only to ordinary physical
reality which are merely ephemeral
features of our culture which are
arbitrary like the rules of a trivial
game that we need only look up and which
if any can be explained only in a way
that attributes an independent existence
to them things of this last type must be
part of the fabric of reality as defined
in this book because one would have to
understand them in order to understand
everything that is understood and quote
end of the reading for today let's
reflect on that last Point first the
whole point of the fabric of reality and
David work David's work broadly is to
understand everything that is
understood right now and so what struck
me in that wonderful podcast with Lully
and David was lully's probing of David
and and and pushing David on this point
about the universality of computation
and how it applied to let's say the
existence of inexplicit ideas and what
practical implications it might have and
all that sort of stuff and it seemed to
me David's point there was well he's
trying to understand everything that is
understood and what is understood by
which we mean what we have presently
good explanations for includes the
universality of computation so let's
take that as red that's what we
understand so if we want to understand
other stuff hither to not yet understood
then one good starting place is to start
deep
fundamentally beneath what the brain is
doing and what the mind is capable of
doing and what's going on there in terms
of physics which constrains the
possibility of what these emergent
things are able to do so let's take
seriously this idea of the universality
of computation which implies the brain
is performing computations after all
every physical system has this onetoone
correspondence between as I keep on
saying
what's going on in terms of the motion
of particles or what the neurons are
doing and you know the possibility of
simulating these things with a quantum
computer so there is this direct link
between Computing stuff and the physical
things so to understand everything
that's understood that's going to be
part of it part of the the way in which
we constrain the world now could the
fundamental things that we understand
right now be wrong absolutely but as I
often say about these things that way
lies kind of a dead end in terms of
making
progress it's possible that everything
we know could be wrong but if you're
going to assume that you're not going to
get very far because all that's going to
happen is you're contradicting all
knowledge which is itself already a
criticism of anything you might put
forward so somehow you have to say first
what what's wrong with that deeper
fundamental Theory point that out you
might have this wonderfully
self-contained theory of psychology you
know I often talk about Donald Hoffman
right Donald Hoffman has this
interesting idea about how well reality
out there might not be anything like
what we think it is which so far so good
that's precisely what you know the
fabric of reality kind of implies and
the word of David Deutch more broadly in
the beginning of infinity kind of
implies we don't get to final physical
reality but then he he jumps to so
therefore we don't have an understanding
of physical reality at all all we have
is a kind of interface which Evolution
has provided us with which could be
completely misleading in all
ways and then it gets a little bit
wishy-washy then he steps Beyond
what we already know and he never
connects with what we actually know he
never talks about the universality of
computation he never talks about physics
as we know it he just says he just
asserts he just comes out with something
that everyone has something that so many
people have come out with before
Consciousness just is
fundamental and it's the deepest thing
it is what constrains everything else
without ever saying what Consciousness
is except to say well he's got a
mathematically precise theory of comput
of ious he doesn't he doesn't I've read
the papers okay the papers that he's put
out and prepare to be underwhelmed with
the level of detail prepare to be
underwhelmed with how he connects any of
these things to physics he says that the
physics literally comes out of his
theory of Consciousness which would be a
good project if it was true but it's not
true he doesn't ever extract general
relativity and quantum theory from his
theory of Consciousness if he did then
we could have something to talk about
but he doesn't he just promises the that
this would be the case or will be the
case in some future development of his
theory but it hasn't happened yet it's
just a promise but he's at least
thinking along the right lines that this
is what it would take okay if he had a
deeper Theory of physics namely a
physics of Consciousness which then
enabled us to predict to show how
quantum theory and general relativity
arose from his theory of Consciousness
then yeah he'd be right and and if his
theory of consciousness was testable
which it isn't his so-called
mathematical Theory Of Consciousness
just isn't anything like it it's just
not and I think he it's sort of it's a
little bit of a grift now unfortunately
a lot of people are Bamboozled by this
they don't understand the mathematics
the mathematics isn't particularly
complicated and when
you you look at it it's just a it's it's
just epistemological era after
epistemological era disconnected from as
I say the fundamental Theory the
fundamental
explanation at the bottom the deepest
we've gone so far of physical reality
which is the quantum theory of
computation it brings together quantum
theory our deepest known physical Theory
with
computation the deepest understanding of
how information processing works it
unites them together it therefore
constrains what is possible for Minds to
do what knowledge can be created and how
it can be created all of that stuff so
knowledge creation exists in this
substrate if you like this this this
it's kind of for one of another word
nested
within uh all these things are nested
within this universality of computation
that's at the bottom it's not to say
it's the the the final bottom that it's
a it's a it's a proper Foundation but
David Deutch works at the foundations
while denying that you know foundations
are a final ultimate thing thing okay
Foundation just means it touches all
these other areas okay a foundational
deep theory has connections to and
constrains what all these other more
emergent things say about the world it
can work in both directions but you've
got to figure out a way to refute that
particular Theory before you go and say
well my theory of Consciousness just uh
it gets deeper than that
without ever explaining exactly how or
what's wrong or critiquing the
universality of computation so you need
to take that seriously you need to take
what we know seriously so far and so
that's what that's what David's doing so
when when you know when he talks to
Lully about this and he's kind of saying
yeah you know I'm I'm interested in what
you have to say about this inexplicit
stuff I I want to understand it better
but hither to mind you you know haven't
heard a a a proper good explanation of
this stuff by the way maybe by the time
this is published they will have
released their next conversation where
the promise is of Lully talking about
how the deeper Theory and the deeper
theory that she says can be incorporated
within David Deutsch's worldview that
these things work together uh that there
is a substantive good explanation there
so um perhaps but at the moment it seems
like from what David has heard that his
worldview and this other kind of stuff
about psychology can indeed work
together and from what I've heard by the
way just for what it's worth I think
everything Lully says is quite right you
know that the human body reacts to
inexplicit ideas absolutely absolutely
you know we we carry around these
inexplicit ideas we develop tension in
our body and we don't know why the
tension is there quite often and finding
the the cause of the tension can help
you to relax and feel better and all
that kind of stuff you know you have to
be careful with these things you know
Sam Harris has this great story about
how when he first got into meditation he
used to think of himself that he was
just so relaxed about everything that he
would go around just staring into
people's eyes because he was so relaxed
and he realized that this wasn't a way
of being relaxed this was a way of in
fact quite the opposite of making other
people feel very uncomfortable it sort
of it was a little bit deranged and he
realized that this is not true
Enlightenment or Insight of they're just
looking into someone's eyes and being
very very comfortable and you know is a
bit of a and he admits himself that
there was a kind of dishonesty to the
whole thing that he was just kind of
pretending you know seeming to be
relaxed and just looking at people and
and and then you know staring intently
at people's eyes because he just felt
that he was just so enlightened that
this was the way in which you were able
to convey to people how relaxed you are
and how much you understood them and
that you were present in in their
presence and all this sort of stuff so
anyway he talks about that and I I do
get that sense sometimes with some
people sometimes who tend in the
direction of let's say certain kinds of
practices like that that it's a genuine
risk of not connecting with people but
distancing yourself from other people
not that L is doing this I'm just saying
that that with within the world of of of
of
psychology mindfulness uh self-help
self-improvement all that kind of thing
there there is in the vend diagram of
those people and and reasonable versions
of that there is some Crossover at times
with you know that concept of all the
Zeal of a convert you know um learning
about certainly you get this within
paperian circles absolutely you know
people new to paperian circles and I I I
fully encourage people to to to take the
idea seriously but there is a risk
sometimes you know and I may very well
have been this I I know I was certainly
this when I first encountered atheism
certainly I was the worst kind of
atheist when uh I first read Dawkins and
I read Harris on this I became one of
those Evangelical atheists I just wanted
to convince everyone that religion was
ridiculous you know and you get the
especially if you're coming out of
something like Christianity and then of
course it takes some for want of another
word degree of Enlightenment to realize
hey it's not all bad you know yeah you
figured out something that that there's
a lot of nonsense there in religion but
you don't have to Evangel Eliz in
exactly the same way that recent
converts to religion will evangelize all
the Zeal of a convert you have to be you
have to be especially critical and
people who are new to papyan
epistemology have to really take
seriously the idea that the criticism
applies to them and poyan epistemology
as well I go out there I evangelize to
some extent about the work of David
Deutsch and Carl poer absolutely but you
have to be careful about this Zeal that
you're not berating bashing people over
the head with it and you're being
critical about the way in which you're
explaining things and so self-help is
like this the self-help movement at
times has this sort of zeal that can be
somewhat offputting to
people not yet persuaded by it and so I
you know I certainly see this in
paperian circles and I bulk at it and I
cringe at it because I think that you
know this is the kind of thing that I
used to do that if you're new to it you
just want to tell everyone you're so
enthusiastic but the problem is it works
against
you objectivists are wonderful at this
by the way wonderful in the the bad
sense they're filled with
Zeal and it's one of the reasons there
are many reasons why people are put off
the work of iron Rand because the Zeal
is so much like religion obviously it's
not religion I think they're right about
so many things but the proponents of
objectivism of the work of ir Rand are
ever trying to persuade people in very
enthusiastic and emotional ways and
accusing others of being you know
enemies or mixed as I often complain
about that unless you are fully on board
then there's something wrong with your
mind all the Zeal of a convert it turns
people off so we always everywhere have
to be careful of that and again I've
gone off onto a rant that has absolutely
nothing to do with this chapter so let
me just go back to David's questions
here so moving all the way back to the
beginning of his list of questions here
he says do abstract non-physical
entities exist so he's going to explain
that yes they do and in it's chapter
five of the beginning of Infinity uh the
reality of abstractions clearly is
coming down on the side of yes they do
exist and he explains a whole bunch of
reasons why these abstract entities have
real physical effects in the world the
most prominent example is knowledge
knowledge is an abstract Thing by the
measure at it's independent of any
physical instantiation so it's
independent of whether you write it on
paper or you type it on a keyboard or
you see it in pixels or however the
knowledge happens to be represented you
know in mind it goes on to have these
causal effects on physical things so the
abstract knowledge exists and not only
does it exist it has real physical
effects in the world David then asks are
they part of the fabric of reality
absolutely he says it is obvious that
numbers the laws of physics and so on do
exist in some sense and not in others by
the way the laws of physics are a really
curious example of a kind of abstraction
they're an abstraction in the sense that
well they're not made of matter that's
the first thing forces are not laws of
physics they're explained by the laws of
physics but then there are the ultimate
final laws of physics idealizations in
some ways the things that actually
govern the universe and then there's our
knowledge of those laws of physics you
know we first thought that you know
Aristotle had an idea of the laws of
physics he was wrong then
Galileo his version was incomplete and
wrong Newton we thought he was correct
for centuries turned out to be wrong
Einstein came along and improved on
Newton's classical physics showing that
it was wrong in a whole bunch of ways
but it was still incomplete quantum
theory then augmented and sort of was in
opposition to much of Relativity and
never really has fit with it but taken
together these two things cannot
simultaneously be true because it's the
distinction between the discret and the
continuous so we're still moving towards
an understanding of the laws of physics
and our understanding of the laws of
physics is itself an abstraction our
knowledge of the laws of physics is an
abstraction about an abstraction the
ultimate laws of physics so all these
abstract things exist talking about
physical stuff that's made of matter
David goes on to say the substantive
question is this how are we to
understand such entities which of them
are merely convenient forms of words
referring ultimately only to ordinary
physical reality which are merely
ephemeral features of our culture which
are arbitrary like the rules of a
trivial game that we only need to look
up end quote so that's the question of
well stuff like the literal you rules of
chess and checkers that's not Fan's
Point Fan's point was to say are the
laws of physics this deep truth about
reality going to turn out to be like the
rules of a checkerboard he's not saying
they will be the rules of a checkerboard
the rules of a checkerboard are
arbitrary and cultural and you know this
little side issue about you know a game
okay these don't have any fundamental
significance but the laws of physics
will the laws of physics will
absolutely of course have fundamental
significance so is our next best
understanding of the laws of physics
going to be simple like the rules of a
checkerboard which you won't just look
look up okay David's question is well
you can look up the rules of a game
they're abstract but you know you just
read the rule book and there it is but
you can't read the rule book of nature
that's Galileo's mistake so there we go
I think that's it for today this has
been a long podcast about just the
introductory remarks of this wonderful
chapter a chapter we can look at with
fresh eyes on toasts given David's
recent relatively recent last few years
speech at the acceptance of his award
for the dir medal one of the direct
medals that he won won two uh but the
most recent one he talked about the
mathematician's misconception that sort
of built upon his work in the beginning
of infinity the reality of abstractions
and that kind of thing and fallibilism
and the work of K POA and that built
upon what is here in the fabric of
reality all of which comes out of this
deep deep truth that he has come to
explain for the first time ever about
the link between quantum theory and
computation about how all physical
systems obey the laws of physics of
necessity that's a necessary truth about
the world logical truth about the world
so if you take that
seriously what falls out of that what
are the consequences in particular what
are the consequences for people
generating knowledge how does it mesh
with Poppa's own fundamental ideas about
epistemology and how knowledge is
created it fits perfectly well okay it's
a physical explanation of Poppa's
abstract understanding of the
fallibility and the error Pro nature of
conjecturing knowledge about the world
reality has no contradictions and it's
our job to try and resolve the
contradictions in our knowledge of
reality so when you have apparent
perfection in physics as Newtonian
mechanics kind of gave us you know
here's everything is just deterministic
and everything just as a matter of fact
obeys these physical laws that give you
perfectly precise predictions how can
that possibly marry up with but look at
the real world it's
unpredictable what do you do then do you
just say well it's just too complex for
us to understand it's not inherently
unpredictable it's just that there's an
intractability problem there well that
kind of exists but there's something
deeper to say about this the
universality of quantum computation
talks about how Quantum systems have
this inherent fuzzy about them the ink
blot notion the all different physically
possible things actually exist out there
in the Multiverse in some way what we
choose to do affects the branch in which
our Consciousness and creativity
generates objects these large things in
physical space the physical space of the
Multiverse and so all of that comes to
bear on a reason why human beings are
fallible make choices and create
knowledge it works together beautifully
it's a beautiful synthesis of
epistemology on the one hand and
fundamental physics on the other
philosophy and physics coming together
and this is why again there's so many
reasons why I've talked about even in
this episode why constructive theory is
so exciting but it brings together you
know two of my deep passions fundamental
physics and epistemology it provides an
opportunity for a way of unifying these
as I've said a few times before
especially in my series with on Kiara
metta's work can we have a true physics
of
epistemology constructive theory opens
the door to that kind of thing that's
thrilling and exciting the possibility
of figuring out what knowledge is
possible and impossible to create what
abstractions are impossible to
understand perhaps that's the work of
girdle and cheering and what
abstractions we can come to understand
better and how we can possibly make
knowledge perhaps possibly make
knowledge fast in some places but we are
restricted to only ever making very slow
and incremental knowledge about certain
things in other areas these are open
questions that constructive theory
illuminates for us or at least provides
us the opportunity for asking and
therefore answering at some point in the
future but for now until next time
[Music]
bye-bye
up
oh